During an attempted drug-trafficking bust this spring on Chicago’s South Side, police Sgt. James Madden took off running after a young man, chasing him into a darkened yard before losing the trail.

Sgt. Madden didn’t know where he was going. That’s because he works for a sheriff’s office 500 miles away, in the northwestern corner of Wisconsin.

The officer’s work doesn’t normally take him so far from his home of Superior, Wis., (population 27,000), but today’s drug trade is imposing unprecedented new burdens on small-town law enforcement. He made the eight-hour drive to pursue a Chicagoan who allegedly traveled to Superior to sell large quantities of a dangerous drug called fentanyl, a synthetic opioid up to 50 times as potent as heroin.

Fentanyl is supercharging the longstanding problem of drugs in small towns. Police, forensic labs and prosecutors are struggling to identify and safely intercept new narcotics that can sicken or kill anyone who handles them, and to combat trafficking networks that sometimes extend many hours away. Death rates from overdoses are now higher in rural areas than in big cities, reversing a historic trend.

“It’s hard to imagine how it could have gotten worse than the heroin we were dealing with,” says Brad Schimel, Wisconsin’s Attorney General. But “the fentanyl has taken this to a new level.”

Fentanyl and other synthetic opioids aren’t just more powerful than heroin, they are cheaper and easier to produce, made from chemicals instead of fields of poppies. Nationwide, 13,882 drug seizures tested positive for fentanyl in 2015, more than double the 2014 number, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last month warned about the growing risk of overdose and death from a “widening array of toxic fentanyl-related compounds being mixed with heroin or sold as heroin,” often without buyers’ knowledge. In one example, it pointed to a recent spate of overdose deaths in Ohio tied to carfentanil, a chemical cousin of fentanyl used to tranquilize elephants and other large mammals.

While Appalachia and the Northeast have been hardest hit by the new opioids, the upper Midwest is also reeling. On the other side of a bridge from Superior, in northern Minnesota, police working for a tri-county task force have intercepted 64.5 grams of fentanyl so far in the third quarter, enough of the deadly narcotic to kill 32,000 people, up from 12 grams in the second quarter. Officials in and around Fargo, N.D., are grappling with a rash of fentanyl-related overdoses this year, including among high-school students who were snorting the drug through nasal-spray bottles.

In some cases U.S. dealers or addicts are ordering fentanyl or chemically similar drugs online, directly from suppliers in China, which the DEA says produces much of the world’s synthetic opioid supply. The agency says a growing number of local dealers have bought pill presses to turn powdered fentanyl into counterfeit painkillers. Chinese suppliers are also sending large quantities of fentanyl or its chemical ingredients to Mexico, where cartels mix the drug into the heroin supply and smuggle it to U.S. cities, says the DEA.

The big-city dealers who bring fentanyl-laced heroin to the Upper Midwest dip in and out of town, and often recruit local addicts to help them hide or sell drugs, making then tougher to catch, police say. In the twin towns of Superior, Wis., and Duluth, Minn., separated by a small bay at the end of Lake Superior, the business is seriously taxing local law enforcement.

“They’re using more and more middle people to distance themselves from the sale,” says Jeffrey Kazel, commander of the tri-county task force and a lieutenant in the Duluth, Minn., police department.

For the sellers, some with gang ties, targeting smaller towns is a smart marketing move. The customers have the means to pay, and there’s less of the cutthroat rivalry that leads to frequent shootings in many urban centers. The return is also greater. A gram of heroin that sells for $50 to $100 in Chicago fetches up to $200 in Northern Wisconsin or Minnesota, law-enforcement officials say.

Police in Superior got a wake-up call in October, when they arrested 31-year-old Michael Clark in a local motel room where he was packaging more than 80 grams of drugs into half-gram baggies, according to a criminal complaint filed in Douglas County Circuit Court.

Officers initially assumed the seized drug was heroin. But when they tested it, mixing it with some liquid reagents in a plastic pouch, the substance didn’t turn green as heroin normally would. “We got back an almost neon yellow color,” Sgt. Madden recalls.

He sent it off to a state crime lab and asked them to put a rush on the analysis. A laboratory scientist soon called with the results: pure fentanyl.

Prosecutors charged Mr. Clark and another man in November with possession with intent to deliver fentanyl as a party to a crime. Mr. Clark, from Chicago, couldn’t be reached for comment. He pleaded not guilty, according to his lawyer, who declined to comment further.

The seizure set off alarm bells across the state, where concern was already mounting about the safety of law-enforcement officers handling synthetic opioids. The drugs are so potent that anyone touching or inhaling even a bit can become seriously ill or die. After two officers in New Jersey fell ill from inhaling a minuscule amount of fentanyl, the DEA this summer sent a videotaped warning to police across the country.

Sgt. Madden ordered several boxes of fentanyl testing kits for his officers, and reminded them to wear protective gloves and screen substances in the office, not outdoors where the powder might blow around.

Wisconsin’s three forensic crime labs, meanwhile, began stocking an overdose antidote called Narcan in case technicians accidentally inhaled or ingested anything during testing, says Sandy Koresch, technical unit leader of controlled substances at the state crime lab bureau. They also began handling any suspected fentanyl cases inside specially ventilated areas.

Across the bay in Duluth, where opioid overdose calls to 911 have nearly quadrupled since 2013, officers this spring began carrying Narcan in their squad cars. Mr. Kazel, the Duluth police lieutenant, says they have already saved 12 people. A nonprofit group donated the first 100 kits, worth $75 each, but now the department is running low and doesn’t know how it will be able to buy more. “There’s no line item for Narcan” in the budget, Lt. Kazel said.

Lt. Kazel also said the Duluth police department has already exceeded its overtime budget this year, in part because of the opioid crisis. The force has tried to save money by getting volunteers from the community to handle some tasks, such as picking up and discarding dirty needles that people call to report.

In Wisconsin, Sgt. Madden oversees a sprawling, seven-county narcotics task force bordering Minnesota to the west and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula to the east. It relies on state and federal grants for much of its funding, money that tends to run out in the third quarter of each year, he says. When it does, officers sometimes have to scale back investigations because they don’t have enough cash to buy drugs undercover, Sgt. Madden says.

Wisconsin’s crime labs are facing a parallel challenge—how to accurately identify a stream of new opioids they’ve never seen before.

The labs have seen a big rise in fentanyl submissions, which soared from 29 statewide in 2014 to 105 so far this year. In recent months they’ve also started encountering drugs highly similar to fentanyl, known as analogs, that they can’t immediately categorize. That has left them scrambling to buy samples of various fentanyl-like compounds from chemical companies, to try to match them to the drugs they’re seeing in the lab, says Ms. Koresch.

Duluth and Superior police are carrying out several trafficking arrests a week, but the opioid supply keeps coming, much of it from Chicago. Police and drug users say the Chicagoans who bring the drugs to town don’t typically mention fentanyl, and in some cases may not know they are selling it.

Duluth’s biggest fentanyl bust happened in July, when police found 46 grams of a substance containing fentanyl stashed inside a Red Bull 12-pack box in the trunk of a car that had been driven up from Chicago, according to a criminal complaint filed in district court in St. Louis County, Minn.

A witness told investigators the rented car had been driven to town by Chicagoan Deonte Bowdry, who was charged with selling fentanyl and heroin, according to the complaint. A related complaint leveled the same charge against his companion, Tiffany Dickerson of Duluth, after police found 16.5 grams of a substance testing positive for fentanyl in her purse. She told police Mr. Bowdry had given it to her to hide, and asked her to text local customers to arrange sales of the drug, which she referred to as heroin, according to the complaint.

C.J. Bird, a Duluth addict, says she nearly overdosed recently after trying to buy heroin from the couple but getting what she believes was fentanyl instead. “Fentanyl scares the crap out of me,” says Ms. Bird, who has since taken steps to get clean.

Mr. Bowdry and Ms. Dickerson are also facing separate narcotics charges in St. Louis County. Neither they nor their lawyers responded to requests for comment .

In Superior, after Mr. Clark’s October arrest, he was released to await a court date. Within weeks, police believe he was back in town selling drugs out of a local addict’s house.

“Clark would send the addict out to make deliveries in the street,” Sgt. Madden says. In December police raided the house, but “they had flushed all the drugs down the toilet,” he says. Prosecutors charged Mr. Clark with possessing drug paraphernalia and helping to obstruct an officer. He posted bail and was released. He pleaded not guilty to the charges, according to his lawyer, who declined to comment further.

Mr. Clark stopped coming to Superior after that and instead asked local addicts to drive to Chicago to pick up drugs, according to Sgt. Madden and a DEA agent’s statements in court papers. So Wisconsin police decided to go to him.

In late May, Mr. Madden’s entire four-man narcotics squad piled into a Jeep Grand Cherokee and a Toyota van for the long drive to Chicago along with an informant—a heroin user from Wisconsin who described himself to investigators as a repeat customer of Mr. Clark’s, according to court records. The informant had arranged to meet Mr. Clark in the South Side neighborhood of West Englewood to buy a stash of drugs, the records show.

The Superior crew coordinated the operation with Chicago police and DEA agents. When they arrived at a South Side police station to prepare for the buy, Mr. Madden saw a wall of 20 or so mug shots of local gang members, and recognized several from their dealings in Superior. “I knew three of them. And we’re probably 8½ hours apart,” he says.

The officers had the informant wear a recording device, and gave him $3,300 to make the purchase, according to court records.

Around 10:45 p.m. on May 26, the informant entered a parked car and bought about 50 grams of a substance later testing positive for fentanyl, according to a criminal complaint filed against Mr. Clark in June in federal court in the Northern District of Illinois.

When the officers rushed to the site of the alleged sale to try to arrest Mr. Clark, about a dozen people hanging out in front of a house took off running in different directions, Mr. Madden says.

It was dark and the agents didn’t know whom to chase, so each ran after a different person. When he hit a dead end in a backyard, Mr. Madden noticed an elderly man sitting on a porch. The man said he had seen somebody run through, headed for a nearby street. Mr. Madden didn’t recognize the name of the street, noting that he was visiting from Wisconsin.

“‘Can I ask you, if you’re from Wisconsin, what are you doing here?’” Mr. Madden recalls the man asking.

“I said because there are drugs from your neighborhood coming to my neighborhood and I’m going to keep coming back until it stops,” he says.

Mr. Clark was arrested soon afterward when he turned up to court for an unrelated matter. He was charged in federal court in Chicago with distributing fentanyl. His lawyer said he pleaded not guilty and is awaiting his day in court.
